---
title: "Sensitivity and Classification of Severe Thunderstorms using Convection-Permitting Model Simulations and Deep Learning"
collection: talks
type: "Invited Seminar"
permalink: /talks/2020-10-21-talk
venue: "Cornell Earth and Atmospheric Science Seminar Series"
date: 2020-10-21
location: "Cornell University, Ithaca, NY (Virtual)"
---

[Cornell University EAS Seminars](https://www.eas.cornell.edu/eas/research/eas-seminar)

Convection development relies largely on the availability of sufficient low-level moisture. Large-scale advection patterns and interactions that occur along the air-sea interface can contribute to downstream environments that are favorable for thunderstorms to initiate. With sufficient thermodynamic buoyancy and a favorable vertical profile of the atmosphere, intense thunderstorms capable of producing severe hazards can develop. These hazards can include tornadoes and large hail, which pose a danger to human life and can cause substantial economic damage. Convection-permitting model simulations have helped advance our understanding of severe thunderstorms and the associated processes that precede their development. By recreating past severe thunderstorms, we can explore the sensitivity of events to upstream conditions, such as sea surface temperatures and low-level moisture. However, kilometer scale grid spacing is not capable of resolving severe hazards explicitly, forcing us to rely on heuristics or environmental parameters to infer whether the model simulated thunderstorms are capable of producing tornadoes and large hail. This is problematic because characteristics of severe thunderstorms can vary based on the climatological season or the specific meteorological pattern, making it difficult to capture hazard potential with predefined thresholds or parameters. Using deep learning, we can train a model to detect the potential presence of hazards in high-resolution simulations of thunderstorms, leading to analyses that are less sensitive to the chosen heuristics or environmental parameters. During this seminar, I will answer the following questions by sharing results from two research studies: (1) How could colder or warmer sea surface temperatures have influenced a past tornado outbreak? (2) Can a convolutional neural network learn to classify thunderstorms in convection-permitting simulations? Finally, the performance of the deep learning model will be evaluated on outlier thunderstorms from a future climate model simulation, in order to explore the out-of-sample robustness of the model.
