---
title: "Core Science Keynote: How Python and Machine Learning Enable Advances in Earth Science"
collection: talks
type: "Invited Talk"
permalink: /talks/2021-01-15-talk
venue: "American Meteorological Society Annual Meeting"
date: 2021-01-15
location: "Virtual"
---

[Conference Page](https://ams.confex.com/ams/101ANNUAL/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/382755)

Python is a flexible and object-oriented programming language. However, Python has grown to represent much more than a language, as it is the foundation of the large ecosystem of open-source libraries and toolkits used by the scientific Python community. Python has proven useful in handling big data sets, visualizing multi-dimensional fields, and discovering patterns in data sets with statistical and machine learning libraries. While these Python applications benefit a wide array of scientific fields and computing tasks, these applications have consistently helped overcome data analysis challenges across the atmospheric, oceanic, and climate sciences.

The power of Python and machine learning in Earth science research will be demonstrated with a high-level overview of an analysis conducted from start to finish in Python. The workflow journey begins with data preprocessing made feasible by Xarray and Dask, two Python libraries that facilitate parallel computing of large, multi-dimensional arrays when combined. The next step includes the use of Keras, a Python library that runs on top of TensorFlow, which makes it easier to develop and reproduce deep learning model architectures from scratch with just a few lines of code. Finally, the exploration of the physical reasons for the predictions made by a trained deep learning model is straightforward with the use of Python visualization and scientific computing libraries.

The interoperability between Python libraries provides efficient and smooth transitions throughout the full analysis workflow, which is beneficial for the large number of physical scientists that have limited computer programming or software development training. Thanks to its versatility, intuitive syntax, and a broad collection of open-source packages and tutorials, Python has and continues to transform Earth science, providing an accessible work environment for students and experienced scientists alike.
