---
title: "Short-Term Prediction of Severe Thunderstorm Hazards with Machine Learning and the Geostationary Lightning Mapper"
collection: talks
type: talks
permalink: /talks/2021-01-12-talk
venue: "American Meteorological Society Annual Meeting"
date: 2021-01-12
location: "Virtual"
---

[Conference Page](https://ams.confex.com/ams/101ANNUAL/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/383499)

Thunderstorms that produce severe hazards (e.g., tornadoes, large hail) can cause substantial economic damage, injuries, and fatalities. Increases in lightning activity, as detected with ground-based stations, have been shown to precede severe hazard occurrence, and therefore data from these sensors have been incorporated into operational models that predict severe hazards. However, ground-based stations are limited in coverage and are focused on the continental United States. The Geostationary Lightning Mapper (GLM) instrument aboard the NOAA GOES-16 satellite became operational in late 2017 and offers highly-detailed spatial and temporal coverage over the full disk of Earth. GLM-derived parameters that are useful for inferring severe thunderstorm activity have been recently developed for use by meteorologists (e.g., flash extent density), but have yet to be used in an operational model for severe weather.

Here we use GLM parameters as input into a machine learning model that predicts tornado and hail occurrence with a lead time of 15 minutes, using the preceding 45 minutes of GLM data. Various neural network architectures are available that can extract temporal information for prediction, but this work explores the use of a recently developed random convolutional kernel transform method, which randomly extracts a large number of features that are subsequently inputted into a classifier. The classifier outputs a probability of a thunderstorm being severe or non-severe. Non-severe events were defined as thunderstorms warned by National Weather Service meteorologists that did not produce severe hazard reports (i.e., observations). The trained machine learning model performs well in predicting tornado and hail activity, as evaluated using the critical success index, and also reduces the number of false alarms of previously warned convection. Results show that GLM data contains useful information about severe hazard development in isolation from numerical weather prediction, environmental observations, and radar (WSR-88D). Therefore, GLM information could be used in operational models in addition to lightning data from ground-based stations. More broadly, this research also shows that machine learning can extract useful patterns from GLM that can aid meteorologists during the nowcasting of severe thunderstorm events for societal benefit.
